feat: :sparkles: add "apps" section to Dashboard Manual (#558)
saleor/saleor-docs: docs/dashboard/app-templates-gallery.md

---
title: App Templates Gallery (preview)
---

> Saleor can be extended with apps - and there are several ways how apps are built.

Author: ```suggestion
Apps are the centerpiece of the extending Saleor model. If you want to learn more about it, we described it in detail in [Extending Saleor -> Apps](../developer/extending/apps/key-concepts.mdx).
```

> Saleor can be extended with apps - and there are several ways how apps are built.

Author: ```suggestion
In this article, we want to describe how Saleor can be extended with apps and what are the ways to build an app.
```

App Templates Gallery is a part of Saleor Cloud Marketplace. As you can see, it doesn't contain exactly "apps",

> but rather templates ready to be spawned on your own instance.

Author: ```suggestion
App Templates Gallery is a part of the Saleor Cloud Marketplace. As you can see, it doesn't exactly contain "apps", but rather templates ready to be spawned on your own instance.
```

> Saleor core is open source and we believe many our users will prefer their code self-hosted and adjusted.

Author: ```suggestion
The core Saleor API is open source and we believe many of our users will prefer their code self-hosted and adjustable.
```

> App Templates Gallery is a part of Saleor Cloud Marketplace. As you can see, it doesn't contain exactly "apps",
> but rather templates ready to be spawned on your own instance.
> 
> Saleor core is open source and we believe many our users will prefer their code self-hosted and adjusted.
> 
> Quick comparison of apps differences:

Author: ```suggestion
Saleor Cloud Marketplace features two types of entities you can use to extend Saleor: templates and apps.

A template is a publicly available foundation you can build upon. It may require an extra setup to work correctly and you need to host it yourself.

An app is an off-the-shelf software, ready to be used immediately. There are two types of apps: 1st party (built and hosted by Saleor) or 3rd party (built by external developers).

Here is a detailed list of differences between them:
```

> Quick comparison of apps differences:

Author: ```suggestion
Here is a quick comparison of differences between apps:
```

> | App Template                          | 1st or 3rd party App                                          |

Author: Any chance we can do something about naming? Can we say "Templates" and "Apps"?

Reviewer: In this context I think its fine to shorten them

| ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Open source boilerplate               | Can be closed sourced                                         |
> | Not yet an app - required setup       | Existing, working solution that can be installed              |
> | Hosted on your Cloud (e.g Vercel)     | Hosted by Saleor (1st party) or App Creator (3rd patry)       |
> | Can be forked and extended            | Owned by App creator. May be open source, but doesn't have to |
> | Can be created by Saleor or community | Can be created by Saleor or community                         |

Author: ```suggestion
| Open source boilerplate               | Can be closed sourced                                         |
| Not yet an app; setup required       | Ready to be used right away              |
| Hosted on your Cloud (e.g Vercel)     | Hosted by Saleor (1st party) or App Creator (3rd party)       |
| Can be forked and extended            | Owned by App creator. The code may be open source |
| Can be created by Saleor or community | Can be created by Saleor or community                         |
```

> App templates gallery focuses on the left side of the table.

Author: ```suggestion
The left side of the table describes what you can find in the App Templates Gallery.
```

# Self-deployed apps

Usually, self deployed apps are connected only for your Saleor instance. Templates can be prepared for a Multi-tenant
compatibility, but likely you will configure it to work with your Shop's needs

> We created App Templates Gallery so you can:

Author: I don't understand the purpose of this paragraph. Could you rewrite it? Is the "We created App Templates..." sentence also a part of it?

Reviewer: I wanted to give context what are motivations behind this feature - what Marketplace adds on top of apps. Doesnt it make sense?

> - Browse a library of templates brought by Saleor team and featured from community
> - Quickly as possible deploy it automatically to Vercel (other clouds will be supported in the future)
> - Automatically install deployed app to your Dashboard

Author: ```suggestion
- Browse a library of templates built by Saleor team or the community
- Deploy them to Vercel (or other future providers) as quickly as possible 
- Automatically install the deployed app in your Dashboard
```

# How self-deployment works

> Here is a simplified diagram how it works

Author: ```suggestion
Here is a simplified diagram of how it works:
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    Saleor Cloud Dashboard->>+Vercel: Create Deployment flow from Github repository
    Vercel->>+Vercel: Create project & clone repository
    Vercel->>+Saleor Marketplace Vercel Integration: Connect
    Saleor Marketplace Vercel Integration->>+Vercel: Set ENV variables in Vercel project
    Vercel->>+Vercel: Build & Deploy
    Vercel->>+Saleor Marketplace Vercel Integration: Inform about success
    Saleor Marketplace Vercel Integration->>+Saleor Cloud Dashboard: Redirect to Dashboard
    Saleor Cloud Dashboard->>+Saleor Cloud Dashboard: Install app

> ```

Reviewer: Hmmm, but this is not exactly an instruction, user will not perform these actions - its architecture overview. I think visual diagram with 3 separate entities is more readable.

If it would be instructions, I agree

> # Getting stated

Author: ```suggestion
# Getting started
```

> Open your dashboard and navigate to Apps -> Marketplace. Browse available apps and try them out

Author: I would remove this whole section, it does not bring too much value atm.

---
title: App Templates Gallery (preview)
---

:::info

<!-- todo: change -->

This feature was introduced in **Saleor 3.8**.
:::

:::caution
This feature is currently in **Feature Preview**. This part of Saleor is not complete
and subject to change but is available to experiment and provide feedback.
:::

## What is App Templates Gallery?

Apps are the centerpiece of the [extending Saleor model](../developer/extending/apps/key-concepts.mdx). They are the preferred way of building custom logic on top of Saleor.

Saleor Cloud Marketplace is your headquarters for managing and installing apps.

:::note
You can find Saleor Cloud Marketplace by going to _Apps_ -> _Marketplace_ in your Saleor Dashboard.
:::

> There are two types of software you can find in Saleor Cloud Marketplace: **templates** and **apps**.

Reviewer: Problably we should change that. There is, I think:
- App Template Gallery
- AND Cloud Marketplace (in progress)

So maybe we can change to
"There are two types of apps you can use in Saleor"

**A template** serves as a foundation you can build upon. It may need an extra setup to work, and you must host it yourself.

**An app** is off-the-shelf software that you can use without further adjustments. There are two types of apps: 1st party (built and hosted by Saleor) or 3rd party (built by external developers).

We listed all the differences between them here:

| Template                              | App                                                     |
| ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- |
| Open source boilerplate               | Can be closed-sourced                                   |
| Not yet an app; setup required        | Ready to be used right away                             |
| Hosted on your Cloud (e.g Vercel)     | Hosted by Saleor (1st party) or App Creator (3rd party) |
| Can be forked and extended            | Owned by App creator. The code may be open source       |
| Can be created by Saleor or community | Can be created by Saleor or community                   |

The left column describes the content of the App Templates Gallery.

---

Summing up, the App Templates Gallery:

> - Is a subset of Saleor Cloud Marketplace.

Reviewer: I dont think its a subset. Maybe its more safe to consider it separate being at the moment
